---
jupyter:
  jupytext:
    formats: ipynb,md
    text_representation:
      extension: .md
      format_name: markdown
      format_version: '1.2'
      jupytext_version: 1.4.1
  kernelspec:
    display_name: Python 3
    language: python
    name: python3
---

# 1.5 oop_intro


# 1 Overview

1. OOP, Object Oriented Programming, is one of the major paradigms in programming.
   - **Data and functions** are "bundled together" into "**objects**"(**PI:.**)
     - Functions in this context are referred to as **methods**(**PI:.**)
2. The traditional programming paradigm (such as Fortran, C, MATLAB, etc.) is called **procedural**, it works as follows
   - The program has a **state** corresponding to the **values of its variables**.
   - **Functions** are called to act on these **data**.
   - **Data** are passed back and forth via **function calls**.

## Python and OOP
1. Python is a pragmatic language that blends **object-oriented** and **procedural** styles, rather than taking a purist approach.
   - However, at a foundational level, Python is **object-oriented**.
     - In particular, in Python, **everything is an object**.
   - In this lecture, we explain 
     - what this statement means and
     - why it matters.


# 2 Objects
1. In Python, an **object** is a collection of **data and instructions** held in computer memory that consists of 
   - a **type**
   - a **unique identity**
   - **data (i.e., content)**
   - **methods**
2. These concepts are defined and discussed sequentially below.

## 2.1 Type
1. Python provides for different **types of objects**, to accommodate different **categories of data**.
   - See 1 & 2.
2. The type of an object matters for many expressions.
   - e.g.
     - The **addition** operator between **two strings** means **concatenation**.
     - The same **addition** operator between **two numbers** means **ordinary addition**.
   - If there are **mixing types**, it is **unclear** to Python whether the user wants to
     - convert `'300'` to an integer and then add it to `400`, or
     - convert `400` to string and then concatenate it with `'300'`.
3. Python is **strongly typed**, though some languages might try to guess.
   - **Type** is important, and **implicit type conversion** is **rare** in Python (**PI: Unclear**).
   - Python will respond instead by raising a `TypeError`.
   - To avoid this error, we need to clarify by changing the relevant type.

```python
# Different types of objects for different categories of data 1
s = 'This is a string'
type(s)
```

```python
# Different types of objects for different categories of data 2
x = 42
type(x)
```

```python
# Addition of strings: Concatenation
'300' + 'cc'
```

```python
# Addition of numbers: Numbers
300 + 400
```

```python
# Mixing-type operations might return Errors.
'300' + 400 
```

```python
# Solve 'TypeError' above by clarifying
int('300') + 400  # to add as numbers, change the string to an integer
```

## 2.2 Identity
1. In Python, each object has a **unique** identifier (identity), which helps Python (and us) keep track of the object.
2. The identity of an object can be obtained via the `id()` function.
   - The identity of an object is(**PI:,**) in fact(**PI:,**) just the **address of the object in memory**.
     - The memory is temporary, so the identity of object may change every time we excute the code including the object.
   - e.g. `y` and `z` happen to have the same value (i.e., `2.5`), but they are not the same object.

```python
y = 2.5
z = 2.5
id(z)
```

```python
id(y)
```

## 2.3 Object content: data and attributes
1. If we set `x = 42`(**PI:,**) then we create an object of type `int` that contains the data `42`.
   - In fact, it contains more (see the example below).
   - When Python creates this integer object, it stores with it **various auxiliary information**, such as 
     - the **imaginary part**, and 
     - the **type**.
2. Any **name following a dot** is called an **attribute** of the **object to the left of the dot**.
   - e.g., `imag` and `__class__` are attributes of `x`.
3. We see from this example that 
   - **objects have attributes** that contain **auxiliary information**.
   - They also have attributes that act like functions, called **methods**.
     - These attributes are important, so we will discuss them in-depth (**PI: where?**)

```python
x = 42
x
```

```python
x.imag
```

```python
x.__class__
```

## 2.4 Methods
1. Formally, **methods** are **attributes of objects** that are **callable** (i.e., can be called as functions)(**PI: .**)
   - e.g., 
   - **Methods** are **functions that are bundled with objects**.
2. **Methods** typically 
   - **act on the data** contained in the **object** they belong to, or 
   - **combine that data** with **other data**(**PI: .**)
3. A great deal of Python functionality is organized around **method calls**.
   - e.g., see part 3 below.
   - It does not look like there are any methods(**PI: remove 's'**) used here, but in fact the **square bracket assignment notation** is just a convenient interface to a **method call**.
   - What actually happens is that Python calls the `__setitem__` method.
     - If we wanted to(**PI: ,**) then we could modify the `__setitem__` method, so that square bracket assignment does something totally different (**PI: what/how**).   

```python
# 1
x = ['foo', 'bar']
callable(x.append)
```

```python
# 1
callable(x.__doc__)
```

```python
# 2 Methods act on data contained in objects
x = ['a', 'b']
x.append('c')
s = 'This is a string'
s.upper()
```

```python
# 2 Methods act on data contained in objects
s.lower()
```

```python
# 2 Methods combine data with other data
s.replace('This', 'That')
```

```python
# 3 
x = ['a', 'b']
x[1] = 'aa'  # Item assignment using square bracket notation
x
```

```python
# 3
x = ['a', 'b']
x.__setitem__(1, 'aa')  # Item assignment using square bracket notation
x
```

# 3 Summary
1. In Python, **everything in memory** is treated as **an object**.
   - This includes not just **lists, strings**, etc., but also less obvious things, such as
     - **functions** (once they have been read into memory)
     - **modules** (ditto)
     - **files opened for reading or writing**
     - **integers**, etc.
2. Consider functions and modules for example.
   - When Python reads a **function definition** (**PI: clarify???**), it creates a **function object** and stores it in memory.
     - We can see that `f` has type, identity, attributes and so on.
       - Just like any other object.
     - `f` also has methods.
       - One example is the `__call__` method, which just **evaluates the function**.
       - Another is the `__dir__` method, which **returns a list of attributes**.
   - Modules loaded in memory are also treated as objects.
3. This **uniform treatment of data** in Python (everything is an object) helps keep the language **simple and consistent**.

```python
def f(x): return x**2
f
```

```python
# Type of `f`
type(f)
```

```python
# Identity of `f`
id(f)
```

```python
# Attributes of `f`
f.__name__
```

```python
# Methods of `f`: `__call__` method
f.__call__(3)
```

```python
# Methods of `f`: `__dir__` method
f.__dir__
```

```python
# Modules in memory treated as objects
import math

id(math)
```


