---
jupyter:
  jupytext:
    formats: ipynb,md
    text_representation:
      extension: .md
      format_name: markdown
      format_version: '1.2'
      jupytext_version: 1.4.1
  kernelspec:
    display_name: Python 3
    language: python
    name: python3
---

# 0.1 Intro to QuantEcon's lectures

**TBC=To Be Checked**

**PI=Potential improvement**


# 1 Overview
Topics of this course include
1. algorithms and numerical methods for studying economic problems,
2. related mathematic and statistical concepts, and
3. basics of coding skills and software engineering.


# 2 Python

1. Differences between Python and Julia:
   - Python is a general(**PI: -**)purpose language featuring a massive user community in the sciences and an outstanding scientific ecosystem. (how to understand ecosystem?)
     - Advantage:
        - Supported by a vast collection of scientific libraries
        - A highly marketable skill.
   - Julia is (**PI: a**) more recent language with many exciting features.
       - Advantage: 3rd-party libraries are often written entirely in Julia itself.

2. Common:
   - Both are modern, open(**PI: -**)source, high productivity languages with all the key features needed for high(**PI: -**)performance computing.


# 2 Open source
All the computing environments we work with are free and open(**PI: -**)source.
Advantages of open sources:
1. Free;
2. You can read them and learn how they work:
   - While dipping into external code libraries takes a bit of coding maturity, it is very useful for
     - helping you understand the **details** of a particular implementation, and
     - building your programming skills by showing you code written by first(**PI: -**)rate programmers.
3. Modify the library to suit your needs:
   - if the functionality provided is not exactly what you want, you are free to change it.
4. It conforms to the [(scientific ideal of reproducibility)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scientific_method). (?)
   - The ability to replicate the analysis process?
   - It is (**PI: a**) more philosophical advantage of open(**PI: -**)source software.


# 3 Other languages?

## 3.1 Matlab

Disadvantages:
1. It cannot match Python or Julia in terms of performance and design.
2. Its proprietary.
Given its availability now, it is hard to find any good reasons(**PI: reason**) to invest in MATLAB.

## 3.2 R

1. [R](https://cran.r-project.org/) is also a useful openHow about Other Languages?
But why don’t you use language XYZ?

2. However, Python is more general(**PI: -**)purpose than $R$ and hence a better fit for this course. 
   - If there are $R$ libraries you find you want to use, then you can now call them from within Python or Julia (**TBC**)

## 3.3 C/C++/Fortran

Fortran/C/C++ is slower than Python due to two reasons:
1. We can achieve speeds equal to faster than those of compiled languages in Python through features like (**PI: a**) **just-in-time compilation** (**TBC**).
2. Writing a program can be thought of as "optimization", and our objective function to minimize is
$$
total \ time = development \ time + executive \ time
$$
There is a trade(**PI: -**)off between development time and executive time that 
   - Our time is a far more valuable resource than the computer's time;
   - Languages like Python are much faster to write and debug in.
   - In any one program, the vast majority of CPU time will be spent iterating over just a few lines of our code. (**make sense**)

Writing our entire program in Fortran/C/C++ is best thought of as "premature optimization(**PI: .**)"
Since writing our entire program in Fortran/C/C++ requires a lot of development time but with little decreases in execution time compared to Python, this is a "premature optimization".
   - We should forget about small efficiencies, say about 97% of the time: premature optimization is the root of all evil (Donald Knuth).

```python

```
