---
jupyter:
  jupytext:
    formats: ipynb,md
    text_representation:
      extension: .md
      format_name: markdown
      format_version: '1.2'
      jupytext_version: 1.4.1
  kernelspec:
    display_name: Python 3
    language: python
    name: python3
---

# 1.2 getting started

**PI# = Potential Improvement #**

**TBC=To Be Checked**

**PI=Potential improvement**

A problem about different personal pronoun.


# 1 Overview
We will learn how to 
1. get a Python environment up and running with all the necessary tools.
2. executae simple Python commands
3. run a sample program
4. install the code libraries that underpin these lectures.


# 2 Anaconda
1. Anaconda is
   - very popular
   - cross(**PI:-**)platform
   - comprehensive
   - completely unrelated to a song of the same name.
All of what follows assumes that we adopt this recommendation!. (**PI:! or .**)

## 2.1 Installing Anaconda

Important points:
- Intall the latest version (**It matters!**).
- If we are asked during the installation process whether we'd like to make Anaconda our default Python installation, say yes.
- Otherwise, we can accept all of the defaults.

## 2.2 Updating Anaconda

1. Anaconda supplies a tool called conda to manage and upgrade our Anaconda packages.
2. One conda command we should execute regularly is the one that updates the whole Anaconda distribution.
   - Open up a terminal 
   - Type `conda update anaconda`
3. For more information on conda, type `conda help` in a terminal. (**PI1**)

<!-- #region -->
# 3 Jupyter notebooks

## 3.1 Starting the jupyter notebook

1. The picture of the Jupyter dashboard is unable to click to enlarge (**PI2**)
2. Click `New` at the top right and select `Python 3` or similar, and the notebook displays an active cell, into which we can type Python commands.

## 3.2 Notebook basics

### 3.2.1 Running cells
1. When a cell is in edit mode, we can type in Python code and it will appear in the cell.
2. When we are ready to execute the code in a cell, hit `Shift-Enter` instead of the usual `Enter`.

### 3.2.2 Modal editing
1. Jupyter notebook uses a modal editing system.
   - A modal editing system means that the effect of typing at the keyboard depends on which mode we are in.
2. There are two modes:
   - Edit mode
     - Indicated by a green border around one cell.
     - Whatever we type appears as is in that cell.
   - Command mode
     - The green border is replaced by a grey border ("grey" should be "blue" here.**PI3**).
     - Key(**PI: no space**)strokes are interpreted as commands
       - e.g., typing `b` adds a new cell below the current one. (**PI4**)
3. To switch to
   - command mode from edit mode, hit the `Esc` key or `Ctrl-M`
   - edit mode from command mode, hit `Enter` or click in a cell.


### 3.2.3 User interface tour

### 3.2.4 Inserting unicode (e.g., Greek letters)

1. Unicode characters can be typed quickly in Jupyter using the tab key.
   - Try creating a new code cell and typing `\alpha`, then hitting the tab key on my keyboard.

### 3.2.5 A test program
1. (**PI: maybe we can use another similar example in the most updated matplotlib library.**)
2. The easiest way to run this code is to copy and paste (**PI: it**) into a cell in the notebook.
<!-- #endregion -->

```python
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
%matplotlib inline

N = 20
θ = np.linspace(0.0, 2 * np.pi, N, endpoint=False)
radii = 10 * np.random.rand(N)
width = np.pi / 4 * np.random.rand(N)

ax = plt.subplot(111, polar=True)
bars = ax.bar(θ, radii, width=width, bottom=0.0)

# Use custom colors and opacity
for r, bar in zip(radii, bars):
    bar.set_facecolor(plt.cm.jet(r/10.))
    bar.set_alpha(0.5)
    
plt.show()
```

<!-- #region -->
## 3.3 Some tips on working with the notebooks


### 3.3.1 Tab completion

1. In the previous program, after we executed `import numpy as np`, functions in Numpy can be assessed with `np.<function_name>` type syntax.
   - We can explore these attributes of `np` using the `Tab` key, which helps remind us of what's available and also saves our typing.


### 3.3.2 Online help
1. We can execute `xx.xx?` to get help on `xx.xx`.
   - Documentation appears in a split window of the browser.
   - Clicking on the top right of the lower split closes the on-line help.

### 3.3.3 Other content
1. The Jupyter notebook also allows us to embed text, equations, figures and even videos in(**PI: on**) the page, in addition to executing code.
2. Next(**PI: ,**) we `Esc` to enter command mode and then type `m` to indicate that we are writing Markdowm.
   - Type `y` to indicate that we are writing code. (**PI5**)
   - We `Shift+Enter` to produce our typing.
   

## 3.4 Sharing notebooks

1. Notebook files are just text files structured in JSON and typically ending with `.ipynb`.
   - We can share them in the usual way we share files or by using web services, such as nbviewer.
2. The notebooks we see on that site are static html representations.
   - To run one, download it as an `ipynb` file by clicking on the download icon at the top right.
   - Save it somewhere, navigate to it from the Jupyter dashboard and then run as discussed above.

## 3.5 QuantEcon notes
1. QuantEcon has its own site for sharing Jupyter notebooks related to Economics-[QuantEcon Notes](http://notes.quantecon.org/).
2. Notebooks submitted to QuantEcon Notes can be shared with a link, and are open to comments and votes by the community.
<!-- #endregion -->

# 4 Installing libraries
1. Most of the libraries we need come in Anaconda, and other libraries can be installed with `pip`.
2. One library we'll be using is [QuantEcon.py](http://quantecon.org/quantecon-py):
    - Install it either 
       - by typing `!pip install --upgrade quantecon` into a cell.
       - by typing `pip install quantecon` into a terminal.
       - more instructions can be found on the [library page](https://quantecon.org/quantecon-py/).
    - Upgrade it by typing `pip install --upgrade quantecon`
3. Another libraries we will be using is [interpolation.py](https://github.com/EconForge/interpolation.py) (**???**)
    - Intall it by typing in Jupyter `!pip install interpolation`.

<!-- #region -->
# 5 Working with files

Run a locally saved Python file using Jupyter notebooks.

## 5.1 Option 1 (**PI**): Copy and paste
1. Navigate to our file with our mouse/trackpad using a file browser.
2. Click on our file to open it with a text editor.
3. Copy and paste into a cell and `Shift-Enter`.

## 5.2 Method 2 (**PI**): Run
1. Use `run` command
   - Easier than copy and paste.
     - e.g., `%run test.py` will run the file `test.py`.
       - `%` is unnecessary, and we can use `%automagic` to toggle the need for `%` (**PI: a potential clarification of magic/automagic**).
          - In Python, magics are a special (non-Python) syntax for performing certain actions.
          - If `automagic` is on, then Python will add the leading `%` if we leave it out...
         
       - Note that Jupyter only looks for `test.py` in the present working directory.
       - If `test.py` is not in that directory, then we will get an error.
     - Can only run file ending with .py
2. Example
   - `pwd` asks Jupyter to show the PWD (or `%pwd`)
     - This is where Jupyter is going to look for files to run.
     - Our output will look a bit different depending on our OS.
   - `ls` asks Jupyter to list files in the PWD (or `%ls`)
     - Note that `xx.py` is there.
   - `cat xx.py` asks Jupyter to print the contents of `xx.py` 
     - type `!type test.py` on Windows.
   - `run test.py` runs the file and prints any output.
   

## 5.3 But file X isn't in my PWD
1. If we are trying to run a file not in the present working directory, then we would get an error.
2. To fix it(**PI:,**) we should either
   - Shift the file into the PWD, or
     - One way to achieve it is to use the `Upload` button on the top(**PI: -**)level dashboard.
   - Change the PWD to where the file lives.
     - This can be achieved using the `cd` command
       - Linux/OSX: `cd /home/user/scripts/dir`
       - Windows: `cd C:/Python27/Scripts/dir`

## 5.4 Loading files
1. Execute `load xx.py` where `xx.py` is in the PWD.
   - Use `%load` if automagic is off. (**PI: mismatch between words and pictures**)
   

## 5.5 Saving files
1. To save the contents of a cell as file `xx.py`,
   - Put `%%file foo.py` as the first line of the cell.
     - `%%file` is an example of a [cell magic](https://ipython.readthedocs.io/en/stable/interactive/magics.html#cell-magics) (?).
   - `Shift+Enter`
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region -->
# 6 Editors and IDEs


## 6.1 JupyterLab

1. [JupyterLab](https://github.com/jupyterlab/jupyterlab) is an integrated development environment centered around Jupyter notebooks.
    - Available throught Anaconda and be made the default environment for Jupyter notebooks.
    - For more information, see its docs or a recent YouTube video.

## 6.2 Text editors

1. A text editor is an application that is specifically designed to work with text files, such as Python programs.
   - Nothing beats the power and efficiency of a good text editor for working with program text.
   - A good text editor will provide
     - efficient text editing commands.
     - syntax highlighting, etc.
2. Some recommendations:
   - The most popular ones are [Sublime Text](http://www.sublimetext.com/) and [Atom](https://atom.io/).
   - A top(**PI: -**)quality open source text editor with a steeper learning curve: [Emacs](http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/).
   - An outstanding free text editor with a seemingly vertical learning plus long days of pain and suffuring while all your neural pathways are rewired (:): [Vim](http://www.vim.org/).

## 6.3 Text editors plus IPython Shell
1. A text editor is for writing programs, and to run them, we can use the [IPython shell](https://ipython.org/), in addition to Jupyter.
   - To use an IPython shell, open up a terminal and type `ipython`.
   - The IPython shell has many of the features of the notebook.
     - tab completion, color syntax, etc.
   - It also has command history (**???**) through the arrow key.
     - The up arrow key to(**PI: delete 'to'**) brings previously type commands to the prompt.
       - This saves a lot of typing.

## 6.4 IDEs
1. IDEs are integrated Development Environments, which allow us to edit, execute and interact with code from an integrted environment.
   - One most popular recently: [VS Code](https://www.anaconda.com/blog/company-blog/vs-code-in-anaconda-distribution-5-1/).
<!-- #endregion -->

# 7 Exercises

## 7.1 Exercise 1

1. Quit Jupyter by typing `Ctrl-C` at the terminal.
2. Launch again without launching the browser by typing `jupyter notebook --no-browser`.
   - The startup message also give us a URL such as `http://localhost:8888`, where the notebook is running.
3. Enter the URL `http://localhost:8888`, and then we are able to run a standard Jupyter notebook.

## 7.2 Exercise 2
1. [Git](http://git-scm.com/) is a version control system:
    - A piece of software used to manage digital projects, such as code libraries.
    
2. In many cases, the associated collections of files (repositories) are stored on [GitHub](https://github.com/),
   - GitHub is a wonderland of collaborative coding projects.
   - Git is the underlying software used to manage these projects.
   - Git is an extremely powerful tool for distributed collaboration.
     - We can use it to share and synchronize all the source files for these lectures.
3. Two types of Git.
    - Plain vanilla version
    - Point-and-click GUI version.
    
4. Forking GitHub.
   - Forking means making our own copy of a GitHub repository, stored on GitHub.
   - Clone our fork to some local directory, make edits, commit them, and push them back up to our forked GitHub repo.
   - If made  a valuable improvement, then send them a [pull request](https://help.github.com/articles/about-pull-requests/).
   
6. For further reading, see
   - [Official Git documentation](http://git-scm.com/doc)
   - Reading through the docs on [GitHub](https://github.com/).
   - [Pro Git Book](http://git-scm.com/book) by Scott Chacon and Ben Straub.
   - One of the thousands of Git tutorials on the Net.

```python

```

```python

```
