---
jupyter:
  jupytext:
    formats: ipynb,md
    text_representation:
      extension: .md
      format_name: markdown
      format_version: '1.2'
      jupytext_version: 1.4.1
  kernelspec:
    display_name: Python 3
    language: python
    name: python3
---

# 1.4 python_essentials

**PI = Potential Improvement**


In this lecture, we will cover **features of the language** that are essential to 
- reading and 
- writing Python code.

# 1 Data types

1. Several built-in Python data types we met before, and we will learn a bit more about them:
   - Strings
   - Integers
   - Floats
   - Lists

## 1.1 Primitive data types: Boolean, Integers, Floats and Complex Numbers

1. **Boolean values** can be either `True` or `False`.
   - In arithmetic expressions, `True` is converted to `1` and `False` is converted to `0` (**PI:**).
     - This is called **Boolean arithmetic**
     - It is often useful in programming.
     
2. The two most common data types used to represent numbers are **integers** and **floats**.
   - Computers distinguish between the two because, 
      - while floats are more informative, 
      - arithmetic operations on integers are **faster and more accurate**.
   - **Division of integers** yields **floats** in Python 3.x
     - In Python 2.x, division of two integers returns only the integer part.
   - For **integer division** in Python 3.x, use `//` instead of `/` (**PI1: 'Python 3.x' should be 'Python 2.x'**).
   
3. **Complex numbers** are another primitive data type in Python.



```python
# Boolean values
x = True
x
```

```python
# The interpreter evaluates the expression on the right of = and
# binds y to this value
y = 100 < 10
y
```

```python
type(y)
```

```python
x + y
```

```python
x * y
```

```python
True + True
```

```python
bools = [True, True, False, True] # List of Boolean values

sum(bools)
```

```python
# Integers and floats

a, b = 1, 2       # Integers
c, d = 2.5, 10.0  # Floats
type(c)
```

```python
# Division

1 / 2 # Division of integers yields floats.
```

```python
9 // 3 # Integer division (??? Why equal 0?)
```

## 1.2 Containers: list vs tuples and set vs dictionary

### 1.2.1 Lists, Tuples and their Slice Notation

#### A. Lists vs Tuples

1. Python has several basic types for storing collections of (possibly heterogeneous) data.
   - Python **Lists** are mutable.
   - **Tuples**, which are "immutable" lists.
     - In Python, an object is called **immutable** if, once created, the object cannot be changed.
     - Conversely, an object is **mutable** if it can still be altered after creation.
   - Python lists are mutable, but tuples are not.
     - The role of mutable and immutable data will be introduced a bit later.
2. Tuples (and lists) can be "unpacked" (**??? extract values from the tuple or list.**).
   - Since **Tuple unpacking** is convenient, we'll use it often.
   

```python
# Tuples

x = ('a', 'b') # Parentheses instead of the square brackets
x = 'a', 'b'   # Or no brackets -- the meaning is identical
x
```

```python
type(x)
```

```python
# Python lists are mutable

x = [1, 2]
x[0] = 10
x
```

```python
# Python tuples are immutable
x = (1, 2)
x[0] = 10
x
```

#### B. Slice notation
1. We can use Python's **slice notation** to access multiple elements of a list or tuple.
   - The general rule is that `a[m:n]` returns `n - m` elements, starting at `a[m]`.
     - Negative numbers for m or n are also permissible.
   - The same slice notation works on tuples and strings.

```python
a = [2, 4, 6, 8]
a[1:]
```

```python
a[-1:]
```

```python
s = 'foobar'
s[-3:] # Select the last three elements
```

### 1.2.2 Sets and dictionaries
1. Two other container types are **[sets](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/datastructures.html#sets)** and **[dictionaries](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/datastructures.html#dictionaries)**.
   - **Dictionaries** are much like lists, except that the items are named instead of numbered.
     - The names `name` and `age` in the example are called the **keys**.
     - The objects that the keys are mapped to (`'Frodo'` and `33`) are called the **values**(**PI**).
     - (**PI2: dict comprehensions are also supported.**)
   - **Sets** are unordered collections without duplicates.
     - The **set methods** provide the usual set-theoretical operations.
     - The `set()` function creates sets from sequences.
     - (**PI3: set comprehensions are also supported.**)

```python
# Dictionaries

d = {'name': 'Frodo', 'age': 33}
type(d)
```

```python
d['name']
```

```python
# Sets

s1 = {'a', 'b'}
type(s1)
```

```python
s2 = { 'a', 'b'}
s1.issubset(s2)
```

```python
s1.intersection(s2)
```

```python
s3 = set(('foo', 'bar', 'foo'))
s3
```

# 2 Input and output

1. Review reading and writing to text files.
   - Writing
     - The built-in function `open()` creates a file object for writing to.
     - Both `write()` and `close()` are **methods of file objects**.
     - The file we've created is stored in the path of the present working directory (pwd), if a different path is not specified. (**PI: remove "to" after "writes"**)
   - Reading
     - The built-in function `open()` creates a file object for reading.
     - The built-in function `read()` enables us to read a file.

```python
# Writing
# Open 'newfile.txt' in current pwd for writing

f = open('newfile.txt', 'w') 
f.write('Testing\n')
f.write('Testing again')
f.close()

%pwd
```

```python
# Reading

f = open('newfile.txt', 'r')
out = f.read()
print(out)
```

## Paths
1. Note that if `newfile.txt` is not in the present working directory (pwd), then this call to `open()` fails.
   - In this case, we can either shift the file to the pwd or specify the full path to the file.

```python
f = open('insert_full_path_to_file/newfile.txt', 'r') # A failure case
```

# 3 Iterating

1. One of the most important tasks in computing is 
   - stepping through a sequence of data and 
   - performing a given action.
2. One of Python's strength is its simple, flexible interface to this kind of of iteration via the `for` loop.

## 3.1 Looping over different objects

1. Many **python objects** are "iterable", in the sense that they can be looped over.
   - Which are not iterable (**PI4: might be important**).

2. To give an example, 
   - we write the file `us_cities.txt`, which lists U.S. cities and their population, to the present working directory.
     - Note that `%%file` (=`%%writefile`, an IPython "magic" command): it puts the content following into a file named by its parameter (**PI5: add clarifications about `%%file`**)
   - we want to make the information more readable, by 
     - **capitalizing names** and 
     - adding commas to mark thousands.

```python
%%file us_cities.txt  
new york: 8244910
los angeles: 3819702
chicago: 2707120
houston: 2145146
philadelphia: 1536471
phoenix: 1469471
san antonio: 1359758
san diego: 1326179
dallas: 1223229
```

```python
# It reads the data in and makes the conversion.
data_file = open('us_cities.txt', 'r')  # `r`: open for reading
for line in data_file:
    city, population = line.split(':')  # tuple unpacking
    city = city.title()                 # capitalize city names
    population = f'{int(population):,}' # add commas to numbers
    print(city.ljust(16) + population)  # ljust(): return the string left justified in a string of length width
data_file.close()                       # remember to close the file
```

3. The `format()` or equivalent `f''` is a string method used for inserting variables into strings (**PI6: clarify `format()`**).
4. The reformatting of each line is the result of **three different string methods**.
   - We will discuss them later (**PI7: it should be clarified.**)
5. The line 3 is an interesting part of this program, which shows that
   - The file object `f` (**PI8: `f` should be `data_file`?**) is iterable, in the sense that it can be placed to the right of `in` within a `for` loop.
   - Iteration steps through each line in the file.
6. This iteration leads to the clean, convenient syntax shown in our program.
   - We will discuss some of many other kinds of **iterable** objects later.
   
## 3.2 Looping without indices

1. Python tends to favor **looping without explicit indexing**.
   - Python provides some facilities to simplify looping without indices.
     - One is `zip()`, 
       - Usage 1: used for stepping through **pairs for two sequences**.
       - Usage 2: used to **create dictionaries**.
     - If we actually need the index from a list, then one option is to use `enumerate()`.
       - The output of the loop is shown below (**PI8: One more output**).

```python
x_values = [1, 2, 3]

# Looping without explicit indexing
for x in x_values:
    print(x * x)

# Looping with explicit indexing
for i in range(len(x_values)):
    print(x_values[i] * x_values[i])
```

```python
# Usage 1 of zip(): step through two sequences

countries = ('Japan', 'Korea', 'China')
cities = ('Tokyo', 'Seoul', 'Beijing')
for country, city in zip(countries, cities):
    print(f'The capital of {country} is {city}')
```

```python
# Usage 2 of zip(): create dictionaries
names = ['Tom', 'John']
marks = ['E', 'F']
dict(zip(names, marks))
```

```python
letter_list = ['a', 'b', 'c']
for index, letter in enumerate(letter_list):
    print(f"letter_list[{index}] = '{letter}' ")
```

# 4 Comparisons and logical operators

## 4.1 Comparisons

1. Many different kinds of **expressions** evaluate to **one of the Boolean values** (i.e., `True` or `False`), and a common type is **comparisons**.
   - Comparison vs. Equality.
     - We use `==` to test for equality.
     - We use `!=` to test for being not equal.
   - One of the features of Python is that we can **chain inequalities**.
   
2. Note that when testing conditions, we can use any valid Python expression. The rule is:
   - If expressions evaluate to any of $0$, empty sequences, containers (strings, lists etc.) or `None`, then they are all equivalent to `False`.
     - e.g., `[]` and `()` are equivalent to `False` in an `if` clause.
   - All other values are equivalent to `True`.
     - e.g., `42` is equivalent to `True` in an `if` clause.

```python
# Inequality

x, y = 1, 2
x < y 
```

```python
# Chain Inequalities

1 < 2 < 3
```

```python
# Assignment vs Comparison

x = 1   # Assignment
x == 2  # Comparison 
```

```python
# not equal

1 != 2
```

```python
# Any Python expression for comparisons
x = 'yes' if 42 else 'no'
x
```

```python
x = 'yes' if [] else 'no'
x
```

## 4.2 Combining expressions with 3 logical connectives
1. We can combine expressions using `and`, `or` and `not`.
   - These are the standard logical connectives (conjunction, disjunction and denial)
2. Remember that (recall the truth table.)
   - `P and Q` is `True` if both are `True`, else `False`.
   - `P or Q` is `False` if both are `False`, else `True`.

```python
1 < 2 and 'f' in 'foo'
```

```python
1 < 2 and 'g' in 'foo'
```

```python
1 < 2 or 'g' in 'foo'
```

```python
not True
```

```python
not not True
```

# 5 More functions: user-defined functions
1. Functions are all important for good programming style.
2. Python has a number of **built-in functions** that are available without `import`.
   - There are many we have already met.
     - `max()`
     - `range()`
     - `list(range())`
     - `str()`
     - `type()`
   - There are Two more useful built-in functions: `any()` and `all()`(**PI: .**)
     - `all(argument)` evaluates to True if all in the argument are True and False otherwise.
     - `any(argument)` evaluates to False if all in the argument are False and True otherwise.
   - The full list of Python built-in functions is [here](https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html). (**PI9: The link here should be updated to python 3.8.**)
3. In this section, we discuss more about user-fined functions constructed using the keyword `def`.

```python
# maximal function
max(19, 200)
```

```python
# It (range(n)) returns a range iterator object starting from 0 to n.
range(10)
```

```python
# It evaluates the range iterator and create a list starting from 0 with n numbers
list(range(6))
```

```python
str(22)
```

```python
type(22)
```

```python
bools = False, True, True
all(bools) # True if all are True and False otherwise
```

```python
any(bools) # False if all are False and True otherwise
```

## 5.1 Why write functions
1. User-defined functions are important for improving the clarity of our code by
   - separating different strands of logic,
   - facilitating code reuse.
     - Writing the same thing twice is [almost always a bad idea](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don%27t_repeat_yourself)(**PI: .**)
     - Do not repeat yourself.
2. The basics of user-defined functions were discussed in lecture 1.3.

## 5.2 The flexibility of Python functions
1. As we discussed in 1.3, Python functions are very flexible.
   - **Any number** of functions can be defined in a given file.
   - Functions can be (and often are) **defined inside** other functions.
   - **Any object** can be **passed to a function as an argument**, including other functions.
     - We already gave an example in 1.3 of how straightforward it is to pass a function to a function.
   - A function can **return any kind of object**, including functions.
2. Note that a function can have **arbitrarily many** `return` statements (including zero (**PI10: statement?**)).
   - Execution of the function terminates when the first return is hit, allowing code like the following example
   - Functions without a return statement automatically return the special Python object `None`.

```python
def f(x):
    if x < 0:
        return 'negative'
    return 'nonnegative'
```

```python
# (**PI: an additional example like below might be good.**)

print(f(1), f(-1))
```

## 5.3 Docstrings
1. Python has a system for **adding comments** to functions, modules, etc. called **docstrings**.
   - The nice thing about docstring is that they are **available at run-time**.
   - With one question mark(**PI:,**) we bring up the docstring, and with two(**PI:,**) we get the source code as well.

```python
def f(x):
    """
    This function squares its argument
    """
    return x**2
```

```python
f?
```

```python
f??
```

## 5.4 One-line functions: `lambda`
1. The `lambda` keyword is used to create simple functions on one line.
   - Functions 1 and 2 are entirely equivalent.
   - The function created by `lambda` is anonymous because it was never given a name.

```python
# Function 1
def f(x):
    return x**3

# Function 2
f = lambda x: x**3

```

2. To see why `lambda` is useful, suppose that we want to calculate $\int^2_0 x^3 dx$ and have forgotten our high-school calculus.
   - The `SciPy` library has a function called `quad` that will do this calculation for us.
   - The syntax of the `quad` function is `quad(f,a,b)`, where
      - `f` is a function,
      - `a` and `b` are numbers.
   - To create the function $f(x)=x^3$(**PI:,**) we can use `lambda` as follows
     - Here the function created by `lambda` is said to be **anonymous** because it was never given a name.

```python
from scipy.integrate import quad

quad(lambda x: x**3, 0, 2)
```

## 5.5 Keyword Arguments vs. Positional Argument
1. The argument passed in `name=argument` syntax is called a **keyword argument**.
   - e.g., `plt.plot(x, 'b-', label="white noise")`.
     - For the last argument, `label` is the keyword.

2. Non-keyword arguments are called **positional arguments**, since their meaning is determined by (**PI: the**) order
   - e.g., `plot(x, 'b-', label="white noise")` is different from `plot('b-', x, label="white noise")`.
3. **Keyword arguments** are particularly useful when a function has a lot of arguments, in which case it's hard to remember the right order.
   - We can adopt keyword arguments in user-defined functions with no difficulty.
   - Keyword arugments can be customized.

```python
def f(x, a=1, b=1):
    return a + b * x

f(2)
```

```python
# This function can be modified as follows
f(2, a=1, b=2)
```

# 6 Coding style and PEP8 (?)
1. To learn more about the Python programming philosophy type `import this` at the prompt.
   - Among other things, Python strongly favors consistency in programming style.
   - We've all heard the saying about consistency and little minds.
   - In programming, as in mathematics, the opposite is true:
     - A mathematical paper where the symbols $\cap$ and $\cup$ were reversed would be very hard to read, even if the author told us so on the first page.
2. In Python, the standard style is set out in [PEP8](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/)
   - Occasionally we will deviate from PEP8 in these lectures to better match mathematical notation(**PI:s.**)


# 7 My answer to exercise and solutions

## 7.1 Exercise 1
1. Part 1: given two numeric lists or tuples `x_vals` and `y_vals` of equal length, compute their inner product using `zip()`.
2. Part 2: in one line, count the number of even number of numbers in $0, \cdots, 99$.
3. Part 3: given `pairs = ((2, 5), (4, 2), (9, 8), (12, 10))`, count the number of pairs `(a, b)` such that both `a` and `b` are even.




```python
# My answer to P1

x_vals = [1, 2, 3]
y_vals = [4, 5, 6]

a = 0
for x, y in zip(x_vals, y_vals):
    a = a + x * y

print(a)
```

```python
# My answer to P2***

numbers = []
n = 99
even=0

for number in range(n+1):
    numbers.append(number)
    
for number in numbers:
    if number % 2 == 0:
        even += 1

print(even)

```

```python
#  Using only 1 row

z= sum(x % 2 == 0 for x in numbers)
print(z)
```

```python
# My answer to P3***

x_vals = [2, 4, 9, 12]
y_vals = [5, 2, 8, 10]

n = 0
for x, y in zip(x_vals, y_vals):
    if (x % 2 == 0) and (y % 2 == 0):
        n += 1

print(n)
```

## 7.2 Exericise 2
1. Consider the polynomial
$$
p(x) = a_0 + a_1 x + a_2 x^2 + \cdots + a_n x^n = \sum^n_{i=0} a_i x^i
$$
2. Write a function `p` such that `p(x, coeff)` that computes the value  above, given a point `x` and a list of coefficients `coeff`.
   - Try to use `enumerate()` in our loop (**PI: See [enumerate()](http://book.pythontips.com/en/latest/enumerate.html)**).

```python
def p(x, coeff):
    p=0
    for c, a in enumerate(coeff):
        p = p + a * (x**c)
    return p
```

```python
coeff = [1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]
f = p(x, coeff)
```

## 7.3 Exercise 3
1. Write a function that takes a string as an argument and returns the number of capital letters in the string.
   - Hint: `'foo'.upper()` returns `'FOO'`.

```python
# The function n() counts the number of capital letters in the argument***
def n(string):
    number = 0
    for i in string:
        if i == i.upper() and i.isalpha():
            number += 1
    return number
```

```python
n('John And Tom')
```

## 7.4 Exercise 4
1. Write a function that takes two sequences `seq_a` and `seq_b` as arguments and returns `True` if every element in `seq_a` is also an element of `seq_b`, else `False`.
   - By "sequence" we mean a list, a tuple or a string.
   - Do the exercise without using sets and set methods.


```python
def a_issubset_b(seq_a, seq_b):
    x = 0
    for i in enumerate(seq_a):
        for j in enumerate(seq_b):
            if i == j:
                x += 1
    if x == len(seq_a) :
        return 'True'
    else:
        return 'False'
```

```python
seq_a = ['John', 'Tom']
seq_b = ['John']

z = a_issubset_b(seq_a, seq_b)
print(z)
```

## 7.5 Exercise 5
1. When we cover the numerical libraries, we will see that they include many alternatives for interpolation and function approximation.
2.Let's write our own function approximation routine as an exercise.
  - In particular, without using any imports(**PI: import**), write a function `linapprox` that takes as arguments:
    - A function `f` mapping some interval $[a,b]$ into $\mathbb R$.
    - Two scalars `a` and `b` providing the limits of this interval.
    - An integer `n` determining the number of grid points.
    - A number `x` satisfying `a <= x <= b`.
  - and returns the [piecewise linear interpolation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linear_interpolation) of `f` at `x`, based on `n` evenly spaced grid points `a = point[0]< point[1] < \dots < point[n-1] = b `.
  - Aim for clarity, not efficiency.

```python
# My answer***

def linapprox(f, a, b, n, x):
    s = (b-a)/(n-1)
    for i in range(n):
        c = a + s * (i-1)
        d = a + s * i
        if x > c and x <= d:
            return f(c) + (x - c) * (f(d)-f(c)) / (d - c)
```

```python
# Answer modified according to John's solution

def linapprox_1(f, a, b, n, x):
    s = (b-a)/(n-1)
    z = a
    while z <= x:
        z += s
    c, d = z -s, z
    return f(c) + (x - c) * (f(d)-f(c)) / (d - c)
```

```python

```

```python

```

```python

```
